README.md, before:

# Packaging and Distribution Lesson

This repository contains a lesson on software packaging and distribution, based in Python.

It was initially written by Henry Schreiner and Kyle Niemeyer during the [INTERSECT RSE Workshop](https://intersect-training.org/workshop22/) held in August 2022 at Princeton University.

This repository builds a website that is live [here](https://intersect-training.org/packaging/).

You can build this website with the following commands if you use rbenv:

```bash
rbenv install 3.1.2  # Build Ruby 3.1.2 from source
rbenv local 3.1.2  # Use Ruby 3.1.2 in this folder
bundle install  # Install all the Ruby requirements for Jekyll
bundle exec jekyll serve  # build and serve the website
```

## Contributing

We welcome all contributions to improve the lesson! Maintainers will do their best to help you if you have any
questions, concerns, or experience any difficulties along the way.

We'd like to ask you to familiarize yourself with our [Contribution Guide](CONTRIBUTING.md) and have a look at
the [more detailed guidelines][lesson-example] on proper formatting, ways to render the lesson locally, and even
how to write new episodes.

Please see the current list of [issues](https://github.com/INTERSECT-training/packaging/issues) for ideas for contributing to this
repository. For making your contribution, we use the GitHub flow, which is
nicely explained in the chapter [Contributing to a Project](http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/GitHub-Contributing-to-a-Project) in Pro Git
by Scott Chacon.
Look for the tag ![good_first_issue](https://img.shields.io/badge/-good%20first%20issue-gold.svg). This indicates that the maintainers will welcome a pull request fixing this issue.


## Maintainer(s)

Current maintainers of this lesson are

* [Henry Schreiner](https://github.com/henryiii)
* [Kyle Niemeyer](https://github.com/kyleniemeyer)

## Authors

A list of contributors to the lesson can be found in [AUTHORS](AUTHORS).

## Citation

To cite this lesson, please consult with [CITATION](CITATION).

[lesson-example]: https://carpentries.github.io/lesson-example

Commit message:

Update README.md (#3)
Adding funding information, modifying the way authors and maintainers
are represented.

---------

Co-authored-by: Henry Schreiner <HenrySchreinerIII@gmail.com>

README.md, after:

# Packaging and Distribution Lesson

This repository contains a lesson on software packaging and distribution, based in Python.

It was initially written by Henry Schreiner and Kyle Niemeyer during the [INTERSECT RSE Workshop](https://intersect-training.org/workshop22/) held in August 2022 at Princeton University.

This repository builds a website that is live [here](https://intersect-training.org/packaging/).

You can build this website with the following commands if you use rbenv:

```bash
rbenv install 3.1.2  # Build Ruby 3.1.2 from source
rbenv local 3.1.2  # Use Ruby 3.1.2 in this folder
bundle install  # Install all the Ruby requirements for Jekyll
bundle exec jekyll serve  # build and serve the website
```

## Contributing

We welcome all contributions to improve the lesson! Maintainers will do their best to help you if you have any
questions, concerns, or experience any difficulties along the way.

Please see the current list of [issues][FIXME] for ideas for contributing to this
repository. For making your contribution, we use the GitHub flow, which is
nicely explained in the chapter [Contributing to a Project](http://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/GitHub-Contributing-to-a-Project) in Pro Git
by Scott Chacon.
Look for the tag ![good_first_issue](https://img.shields.io/badge/-good%20first%20issue-gold.svg). 
This indicates that the maintainers will welcome a pull request fixing this issue.  

If you contribute to this lesson and would like to acknowledge specific funding support, please add it to the Funding section of the README below.

## Author(s)
The contributing author(s) to this lesson are:

* [Henry Schreiner](https://github.com/henryiii)
* [Kyle Niemeyer](https://github.com/kyleniemeyer)


## Maintainer(s)

[Henry Schreiner](https://github.com/henryiii)

If you would like to serve as a maintainer please [contact us](https://intersect-training.org/contact/).

## Citation

To cite this lesson, please consult with [CITATION](CITATION).

[lesson-example]: https://carpentries.github.io/lesson-example

## Funding

The INTERSECT project is supported by NSF awards [2017424](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2017424) and [2017259](https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=2017259).
