_episodes/01.1-task-runners.md, before:

---
title: "Task runners"
teaching: 5
exercises: 5
questions:
- "How can you ensure others run the same code you do?"
objectives:
- "Use a task runner to manage environments and run code"
keypoints:
- "A task runner makes it easier to contribute to software"
---


A task runner is a tool that lets you specify a set of tasks via a common
interface.


You can use a task runner to:
- make it easy and simple for new contributors to run things
- make specialized developer tasks easy.
- avoid making single-use virtual environments for docs and other rarely run tasks.


Examples include:
- [make][] (fully general),
- [rake][] (Ruby general),
- [invoke][] (Python general),
- [tox][] (Python packages), or
- [nox][] (Python semi-general).

> ## Task Runner as Crutch
> Task runners can be a crutch, allowing poor packaging practices to be
> employed behind a custom script, and they can hide what is actually happening.
{:.caution}

[nox]: https://nox.thea.codes
[tox]: https://tox.readthedocs.io
[invoke]: https://www.pyinvoke.org
[rake]: https://ruby.github.io/rake/
[make]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/

## Nox

Nox has two strong points that help with this concern. First, it is very
explicit, and even prints what it is doing as it operates. Unlike the older
tox, it does not have any implicit assumptions built-in. Second, it has very
elegant built-in support for both virtual and Conda environments. This can
greatly reduce new contributor friction with your codebase.

A daily developer is not expected to use nox for simple tasks, like running
tests or linting. You should not rely on nox to make a task that should be made
simple and standard (like building a package) complicated. You are not expected
to use nox for linting on CI, or sometimes even for testing on CI, even if
those tasks are provided for users. Nox is a few seconds slower than running
directly in a custom environment - but for new users and rarely run tasks, it
is _much_ faster than explaining how to get setup or manually messing with
virtual environments. It is also highly reproducible, creating and destroying
the temporary environment each time by default.

Since nox is an application, you should install it with `pipx`. If you use
Homebrew, you can install `nox` with that (Homebrew isolates Python apps it
distributes too, just like pipx).

## Running nox

If you see a `noxfile.py` in a repository, that means nox is supported. You can start
by checking to see what the different tasks (called `sessions` in nox) are provided
by the noxfile author. For example, if we do this on `packaging.python.org`'s repository:

```bash
nox -l  # or --list-sessions
```

```
Sessions defined in /github/pypa/packaging.python.org/noxfile.py:

- translation -> Build the gettext .pot files.
- build -> Make the website.
- preview -> Make and preview the website.
- linkcheck -> Check for broken links.

sessions marked with * are selected, sessions marked with - are skipped.
```
{:.output}

You can see that there are several different sessions. You can run them with `-s`:

```bash
nox -s preview
```

Will build and start up a preview of the site.

If you need to pass options to the session, you can separate nox options with
and the session options with `--`,
e.g. `nox -s preview -- --quiet` to pass the `--quiet` flag to the session named `preview`.

## Writing a Noxfile

For this example, we'll need a minimal test file for pytest to run. Let's make
this file in a local directory:

```python
# test_nox.py


def test_runs():
    assert True
```

Let's write our own noxfile. If you are familiar with pytest, this should look
familiar as well; it's intentionally rather close to pytest. We'll make a
minimal session that runs pytest:

```python
# noxfile.py
import nox


@nox.session()
def tests(session):
    session.install("pytest")
    session.run("pytest")
```

A noxfile is valid Python, so we import nox. The session decorator tells nox
that this function is going to be a session. By default, the name will be the
function name, the description will be the function docstring, it will run on
the current version of Python (the one nox is using), and it will make a
virtual environment each time the session runs, though all of this is
changeable via keyword arguments to session.

The session function will be given a `nox.Session` object that has various
useful methods. `.install` will install things with pip, and `.run` will run a
command in a session. The `.run` command will print a warning if you use an
executable outside the virtual environment unless `external=True` is passed.
Errors will exit the session.

Let's expand this a little:


```python
# noxfile.py
import nox


@nox.session()
def tests(session: nox.Session) -> None:
    """
    Run our tests.
    """
    session.install("pytest")
    session.run("pytest", *session.posargs)
```

This adds a type annotation to the session object, so that IDE's and type
checkers can help you write the code in the function. There's a docstring,
which will print out nice help text when a user lists the sessions. And we pass
through to pytest anything the user passes in via `session.posargs`.


Let's try running it:

```bash
nox -s tests
```

```
nox > Running session tests
nox > Creating virtual environment (virtualenv) using python3.10 in .nox/tests
nox > python -m pip install pytest
nox > pytest
==================================== test session starts ====================================
platform darwin -- Python 3.10.5, pytest-7.1.2, pluggy-1.0.0
rootdir: /Users/henryschreiner/git/teaching/packaging
collected 1 item

test_nox.py .                                                                          [100%]

===================================== 1 passed in 0.05s =====================================
nox > Session tests was successful.
```
{:.output}


> ## Passing arguments through
> Try passing `--verbose` to pytest.
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > nox -s tests -- --verbose
> > ```
> {:.solution}
{:.challenge}


> ## Virtual environments
>
> Nox is really just doing the same thing we would do manually (and printing all the steps except the
> exact details of creating the virtual environment. You can see the virtual environment in `.nox/tests`!
> How would you activate this environment?
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > . .nox/tests/bin/activate
> > ```
> {:.solution}
{:.challenge}

{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

remove need for a fake test file for nox

_episodes/01.1-task-runners.md, after:

---
title: "Task runners"
teaching: 5
exercises: 5
questions:
- "How can you ensure others run the same code you do?"
objectives:
- "Use a task runner to manage environments and run code"
keypoints:
- "A task runner makes it easier to contribute to software"
---


A task runner is a tool that lets you specify a set of tasks via a common
interface.


You can use a task runner to:
- make it easy and simple for new contributors to run things
- make specialized developer tasks easy.
- avoid making single-use virtual environments for docs and other rarely run tasks.


Examples include:
- [make][] (fully general),
- [rake][] (Ruby general),
- [invoke][] (Python general),
- [tox][] (Python packages), or
- [nox][] (Python semi-general).

> ## Task Runner as Crutch
> Task runners can be a crutch, allowing poor packaging practices to be
> employed behind a custom script, and they can hide what is actually happening.
{:.caution}

[nox]: https://nox.thea.codes
[tox]: https://tox.readthedocs.io
[invoke]: https://www.pyinvoke.org
[rake]: https://ruby.github.io/rake/
[make]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/

## Nox

Nox has two strong points that help with this concern. First, it is very
explicit, and even prints what it is doing as it operates. Unlike the older
tox, it does not have any implicit assumptions built-in. Second, it has very
elegant built-in support for both virtual and Conda environments. This can
greatly reduce new contributor friction with your codebase.

A daily developer is not expected to use nox for simple tasks, like running
tests or linting. You should not rely on nox to make a task that should be made
simple and standard (like building a package) complicated. You are not expected
to use nox for linting on CI, or sometimes even for testing on CI, even if
those tasks are provided for users. Nox is a few seconds slower than running
directly in a custom environment - but for new users and rarely run tasks, it
is _much_ faster than explaining how to get setup or manually messing with
virtual environments. It is also highly reproducible, creating and destroying
the temporary environment each time by default.

Since nox is an application, you should install it with `pipx`. If you use
Homebrew, you can install `nox` with that (Homebrew isolates Python apps it
distributes too, just like pipx).

## Running nox

If you see a `noxfile.py` in a repository, that means nox is supported. You can start
by checking to see what the different tasks (called `sessions` in nox) are provided
by the noxfile author. For example, if we do this on `packaging.python.org`'s repository:

```bash
nox -l  # or --list-sessions
```

```
Sessions defined in /github/pypa/packaging.python.org/noxfile.py:

- translation -> Build the gettext .pot files.
- build -> Make the website.
- preview -> Make and preview the website.
- linkcheck -> Check for broken links.

sessions marked with * are selected, sessions marked with - are skipped.
```
{:.output}

You can see that there are several different sessions. You can run them with `-s`:

```bash
nox -s preview
```

Will build and start up a preview of the site.

If you need to pass options to the session, you can separate nox options with
and the session options with `--`,
e.g. `nox -s preview -- --quiet` to pass the `--quiet` flag to the session named `preview`.

## Writing a Noxfile

Let's write our own noxfile. If you are familiar with pytest, this should look
familiar as well; it's intentionally rather close to pytest. We'll make a
minimal session that runs pytest:

```python
# noxfile.py
import nox


@nox.session()
def tests(session):
    session.install("pytest", "numpy")
    session.run("pytest")
```

A noxfile is valid Python, so we import nox. The session decorator `@nox.session()` tells nox
that this function is going to be a session. By default, the name will be the
function name, the description will be the function docstring, it will run on
the current version of Python (the one nox is using), and it will make a
virtual environment each time the session runs, though all of this is
changeable via keyword arguments to session.

If you have a `pyproject.toml` file, you can leverage that to install the dependencies:
```python
# noxfile.py
import nox


@nox.session()
def tests(session):
    session.install(".[dev]")
    session.run("pytest")
```

The session function will be given a `nox.Session` object that has various
useful methods. `.install` will install things with pip, and `.run` will run a
command in a session. The `.run` command will print a warning if you use an
executable outside the virtual environment unless `external=True` is passed.
Errors will exit the session.

Let's expand this a little:


```python
# noxfile.py
import nox


@nox.session()
def tests(session: nox.Session) -> None:
    """
    Run our tests.
    """
    session.install(".[dev]")
    session.run("pytest", *session.posargs)
```

This adds a type annotation to the session object, so that IDEs and type
checkers can help you write the code in the function. There's a docstring,
which will print out nice help text when a user lists the sessions. And we pass
through to pytest anything the user passes in via `session.posargs`.


Let's try running it:

```bash
nox -s tests
```

```
nox > Running session tests
nox > Creating virtual environment (virtualenv) using python3.10 in .nox/tests
nox > python -m pip install pytest numpy
nox > pytest
==================================== test session starts ====================================
platform darwin -- Python 3.10.5, pytest-7.1.2, pluggy-1.0.0
rootdir: /Users/henryschreiner/git/teaching/packaging
collected 1 item

test_rescale.py .                                                                      [100%]

===================================== 1 passed in 0.05s =====================================
nox > Session tests was successful.
```
{:.output}


> ## Passing arguments through
> Try passing `--verbose` to pytest.
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > nox -s tests -- --verbose
> > ```
> {:.solution}
{:.challenge}


> ## Virtual environments
>
> Nox is really just doing the same thing we would do manually (and printing all the steps except the
> exact details of creating the virtual environment. You can see the virtual environment in `.nox/tests`!
> How would you activate this environment?
>
> > ## Solution
> > ```bash
> > . .nox/tests/bin/activate
> > ```
> {:.solution}
{:.challenge}


{% include links.md %}
