_episodes/06-documentation.md, before:

---
title: "Documentation"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How do I document my project?"
objectives:
- "Learn how to set up documentation"
keypoints:
- "Sphinx is used for documentation"
---

Documentation used to require learning RestructureText (sometimes referred to as
ReST / RST), but today we have great choices for documentation in markdown, the
same format used by GitHub, Wikipedia, and others.  You should select one of the
two major documentation toolchains, sphinx or mkdocs. We will select the older
Sphinx for this tutorial, and use the modern MyST plugin to get markdown
support.

## Basic template

We'll start with the built-in template. Start by creating a `docs/` directory
within your project (i.e. next to `src/`).

{: .solution }
> ## Why not Sphinx-Quickstart?
>
> You _could_ use sphinx-quickstart to set up a basic template if you'd like.
>
> ```bash
> pipx run --spec sphinx sphinx-quickstart --no-makefile --no-batchfile --ext-autodoc --ext-intersphinx --extensions myst_parser --suffix .md docs
> ```
>
> But this will put Restructured Text into the `index.md` file, and doesn't really generate that much for you. You can instead add the `docs/conf.py` file yourself, which is what we'll do here.

You first file is a configuration file, `docs/conf.py`:

```python
# docs/conf.py

project = "example"
extensions = ["myst_parser"]
source_suffix = [".rst", ".md"]
```


And add (a correct) `docs/index.md` yourself:

````md
# package

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 2
:hidden:

```

## Indices and tables

* {ref}`genindex`
* {ref}`modindex`
* {ref}`search`
````

As you add new pages, you will list them in the toctree above.

Even if you used it, the generation won't add a `docs` extra (or
`docs/requirements.txt`, if you prefer not making a public extra) for you, so
you'll need to add this yourself to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
docs = [
  "myst_parser >=0.13",
  "sphinx >=4.0",
]
```

And add a session to your `noxfile.py` to generate docs:

```python
import argprase

import nox


@nox.session(reuse_venv=True)
def docs(session: nox.Session) -> None:
    """
    Build the docs. Pass "--serve" to serve.
    """

    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("--serve", action="store_true", help="Serve after building")
    args, posargs = parser.parse_known_args(session.posargs)

    session.install("-e.[docs]")
    session.chdir("docs")

    session.run(
        "sphinx-build",
        "-b",
        "html",
        ".",
        f"_build/html",
        *posargs,
    )

    if args.serve:
        session.log("Launching docs at http://localhost:8000/ - use Ctrl-C to quit")
        session.run("python", "-m", "http.server", "8000", "-d", "_build/html")
```

And you now have working docs that you can generate and view cross platform with `nox -s docs -- --serve`!

If you want to use https://readthedocs.org to build your docs, you'll also want the following `.readthedocs.yml`:

```yaml
version: 2
build:
  os: "ubuntu-22.04"
  tools:
    python: "3.11"
sphinx:
  configuration: docs/conf.py
python:
  install:
    - method: pip
      path: .
      extra_requirements:
        - docs
```

{: .challenge}

> ## Adding a page
>
> Try adding a page. Remember to update your `index.md` table of contents.

{: .challenge}

> ## Readme in docs
>
> If you want to include your readme in your docs, you can add something like this:
>
> ````md
> ```{include} ../README.md
> :start-after: <!-- SPHINX-START -->
> ```
> ````
>
> And you use `<!-- SPHINX-START -->` to mark where you want your docs part of
> your readme to start (generally after the title and badges).

{: .challenge}

> ## Selecting a nicer theme
>
> A really nice theme, used by PyPA projects like pip and pipx, is `furo`. To use it, add this line to your `conf.py`:
>
> ```python
> html_theme = "furo"
> ```
>
> And add `"furo"` to your `docs` extra in your `pyproject.toml`.

{: .checklist }

> ## Further reading
>
> To see a more complete example, read [Scientific-Python's docs guide](https://learn.scientific-python.org/development/guides/docs/).


{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

add extra block to Sphinx documentation
Clarify how to use the <!-- SPHINX-START --> tag in the readme file

_episodes/06-documentation.md, after:

---
title: "Documentation"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How do I document my project?"
objectives:
- "Learn how to set up documentation"
keypoints:
- "Sphinx is used for documentation"
---

Documentation used to require learning RestructureText (sometimes referred to as
ReST / RST), but today we have great choices for documentation in markdown, the
same format used by GitHub, Wikipedia, and others.  You should select one of the
two major documentation toolchains, sphinx or mkdocs. We will select the older
Sphinx for this tutorial, and use the modern MyST plugin to get markdown
support.

## Basic template

We'll start with the built-in template. Start by creating a `docs/` directory
within your project (i.e. next to `src/`).

{: .solution }
> ## Why not Sphinx-Quickstart?
>
> You _could_ use sphinx-quickstart to set up a basic template if you'd like.
>
> ```bash
> pipx run --spec sphinx sphinx-quickstart --no-makefile --no-batchfile --ext-autodoc --ext-intersphinx --extensions myst_parser --suffix .md docs
> ```
>
> But this will put Restructured Text into the `index.md` file, and doesn't really generate that much for you. You can instead add the `docs/conf.py` file yourself, which is what we'll do here.

You first file is a configuration file, `docs/conf.py`:

```python
# docs/conf.py

project = "example"
extensions = ["myst_parser"]
source_suffix = [".rst", ".md"]
```


And add (a correct) `docs/index.md` yourself:

````md
# package

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 2
:hidden:

```

## Indices and tables

* {ref}`genindex`
* {ref}`modindex`
* {ref}`search`
````

As you add new pages, you will list them in the toctree above.

Even if you used it, the generation won't add a `docs` extra (or
`docs/requirements.txt`, if you prefer not making a public extra) for you, so
you'll need to add this yourself to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
docs = [
  "myst_parser >=0.13",
  "sphinx >=4.0",
]
```

And add a session to your `noxfile.py` to generate docs:

```python
import argprase

import nox


@nox.session(reuse_venv=True)
def docs(session: nox.Session) -> None:
    """
    Build the docs. Pass "--serve" to serve.
    """

    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    parser.add_argument("--serve", action="store_true", help="Serve after building")
    args, posargs = parser.parse_known_args(session.posargs)

    session.install("-e.[docs]")
    session.chdir("docs")

    session.run(
        "sphinx-build",
        "-b",
        "html",
        ".",
        f"_build/html",
        *posargs,
    )

    if args.serve:
        session.log("Launching docs at http://localhost:8000/ - use Ctrl-C to quit")
        session.run("python", "-m", "http.server", "8000", "-d", "_build/html")
```

And you now have working docs that you can generate and view cross platform with `nox -s docs -- --serve`!

If you want to use https://readthedocs.org to build your docs, you'll also want the following `.readthedocs.yml`:

```yaml
version: 2
build:
  os: "ubuntu-22.04"
  tools:
    python: "3.11"
sphinx:
  configuration: docs/conf.py
python:
  install:
    - method: pip
      path: .
      extra_requirements:
        - docs
```

{: .challenge}

> ## Adding a page
>
> Try adding a page. Remember to update your `index.md` table of contents.

{: .challenge}

> ## Readme in docs
>
> If you want to include your readme in your docs, you can add something like this:
>
> ````md
> ```{include} ../README.md
> :start-after: <!-- SPHINX-START -->
> ```
> ````
>
> And you use `<!-- SPHINX-START -->` to mark where you want your docs part of
> your `README.md` to start (generally after the title and badges).
> ```markdown
> # Package
>
> <!-- SPHINX-START -->
>
> `package` is a simple Python library that contains a single function for rescaling arrays.
> ```

{: .challenge}

> ## Selecting a nicer theme
>
> A really nice theme, used by PyPA projects like pip and pipx, is `furo`. To use it, add this line to your `conf.py`:
>
> ```python
> html_theme = "furo"
> ```
>
> And add `"furo"` to your `docs` extra in your `pyproject.toml`.

{: .checklist }

> ## Further reading
>
> To see a more complete example, read [Scientific-Python's docs guide](https://learn.scientific-python.org/development/guides/docs/).


{% include links.md %}
