---
title: "Documentation with MkDocs Material"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How do I document my project?"
objectives:
- "Learn how to set up documentation"
keypoints:
- "MkDocs is great for documentation"
---

We will use the [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) framework with the
[Material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) theme for this lesson.

## Install dependencies

Start by installing the `material-mkdocs` package into you virtual environment.

Add this to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
...
docs = [
  "mkdocs-material"
]
```

... then reinstall using `pip install --editable ".[docs]"`.

## Basic template

Then create an empty site using:
```bash
mkdocs new .
```

This will create files and directories as follows:
```
.
├─ docs/
│  └─ index.md
└─ mkdocs.yml
```

- The `index.md` file will contain the content on the front page of your documentation website.
- The `mkdocs.yml` file is the configuration file for the documentation.

## Basic configuration

In the `mkdocs.yml` file, set the site name and add some additional lines to enable the theme:

```yaml
site_name: Package
site_url: https://hollandjg.github.io/package
theme:
  name: material
```

> ## `site_url` is important
> It is important to set the `site_url` because it's assumed to be set by a number of plugins.
>
> It's set here to a [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) address –
> you can set it to `https://<your github username>.github.io/<your package name>`
> or any other domain where you want to publish.
{:.callout}

## Preview the site

You can preview the site as you change it by running the "preview server":

```bash
mkdocs serve
```

## Update the `index.md`

And add (a correct) `docs/index.md` yourself:

````md
# package

`package` is a simple Python library that contains a single function for rescaling arrays.

## Installation

You can install the package by calling:
```bash
pip install https://github.com/<your github username>/<the package name>
```

## Usage

```python
import numpy as np
from package.rescale import rescale

# rescales over 0 to 1
rescale(np.linspace(0, 100, 5))
```

````

> ## `README.md` vs `index.md`
> Often, similar information will be contained in the repository README
> and the index page of the documentation – installation instructions,
> basic usage, licensing etc., and so it's common to want to include
> (parts of) the README in the index page.
>
> Sphinx has built-in tools to allow you to include parts of another markdown file
> directly, but MkDocs doesn't.
>
> We'd recommend writing the `index.md` and `README.md` files separately,
> so that you can vary the information and instructions you present
> for the particular audience.
>
> For instance, someone viewing the repository can be expected to know where to download
> the source code from, whereas someone viewing the documentation website might not.
{:.callout}

## Add Code Reference

We'll add a new page to the documentation with the docstrings from the package.

- Add the `mkdocstrings` plugin to `mkdocs.yml`:
  ```yaml
  plugins:
  - mkdocstrings
  ```
- Include the `mkdocstrings[python]` package in the `docs` dependencies:
  ```toml
  [project.optional-dependencies]
  docs = [
    "mkdocs-material",
    "mkdocstrings[python]"
  ]
  ```
- Add a new page `docs/ref.md` with the content:
  ```md
  # Code Reference

  ::: package.rescale

  ```
- Reload the documentation preview.

Mkdocs automatically adds the additional page to your documentation.

## Read The Docs

If you want to use https://readthedocs.org to build your docs, you'll need to add a `.readthedocs.yml` file. Find details at [https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file).



> ## Adding a page
>
> Try adding another page.
{: .challenge}

> ## Add documentation generation to your task runner
>
> Add the commands do preview and build your documentation to the `nox` task runner.
>
> > ## Solution
> > Add a session to your `noxfile.py` to generate docs:
> >
> > ```python
> > import nox
> >
> > @nox.session()
> > def preview_docs(session: nox.Session):
> >     """Show the documentation preview."""
> >     session.install(".[docs]")
> >     session.run("mkdocs", "serve")
> >
> > @nox.session()
> > def build_docs(session: nox.Session):
> >     """Build the documentation."""
> >     session.install(".[docs]")
> >     session.run("mkdocs", "build")
> > ```
> > You now have working docs that you can generate and view cross platform with `nox -s preview_docs`!
> {:.solution}
{: .challenge}



> ## Further reading
>
> To see a more complete example, read [Scientific-Python's docs guide](https://learn.scientific-python.org/development/guides/docs/).
{:.callout}




{% include links.md %}
