_episodes/07.2-documentation-mkdocs-material.md, before:

---
title: "Documentation with MkDocs Material"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How do I document my project?"
objectives:
- "Learn how to set up documentation using Material for MkDocs"
keypoints:
- "MkDocs is great for documentation"
---

In this lesson, we'll outline creating a documentation webpage
using the [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) framework
with the [Material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) theme.

You will:
- add the necessary dependencies to your `pyproject.toml` file,
- set up a basic documentation directory,
- create a configuration which comes with a table of contents by default,
- start a preview server,
- add a page which includes a code listing for your `rescale` function.


## Dependencies

Start by installing the `material-mkdocs` package into you virtual environment.

Add this to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
...
docs = [
  "mkdocs-material"
]
```

... then reinstall using `pip install --editable ".[docs]"`.

> ## `doc` or `docs`
>
> The [python packaging standard](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/#provides-extra-multiple-use)
> for the name of this extra is `doc`, whereas `docs` is ~3x more popular.
{:.callout}

## Template

Create an empty site using:
```bash
mkdocs new .
```

This will create files and directories as follows:
```
.
├─ docs/
│  └─ index.md
└─ mkdocs.yml
```

- The `index.md` file will contain the content on the front page of your documentation website.
- The `mkdocs.yml` file is the configuration file for the documentation.

## Configuration

In the `mkdocs.yml` file, set the site name and add some additional lines to enable the theme:

```yaml
site_name: Example Package YOUR USERNAME HERE
site_url: https://<your github username>.github.io/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE
theme:
  name: material
```

> ## `site_url` is important
> It is important to set the `site_url` because it's assumed to be set by a number of plugins.
>
> It's set here to a [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) address –
> you can set it to `https://<your github username>.github.io/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE`
> or any other domain where you want to publish.
{:.callout}

## Preview

You can preview the site as you change it by running the "preview server":

```bash
mkdocs serve
```

## Update `index.md`

And add (a correct) `docs/index.md` yourself:

````md
<!--- docs/index.md -->
# Example Package YOUR USERNAME HERE

`example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE` is a simple Python library that contains a single function for rescaling arrays.

## Installation

You can install the package by calling:
```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/<your github username>/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE
```

## Usage

```python
import numpy as np
from example_package_YOUR_USERNAME_HERE.rescale import rescale

# rescales over 0 to 1
rescale(np.linspace(0, 100, 5))
```

````

> ## `README.md` vs `index.md`
> Often, similar information will be contained in the repository README
> and the index page of the documentation – installation instructions,
> basic usage, licensing etc., and so it's common to want to include
> (parts of) the README in the index page.
>
> Sphinx has built-in tools to allow you to include parts of another markdown file
> directly, but MkDocs doesn't.
>
> We'd recommend writing the `index.md` and `README.md` files separately,
> so that you can vary the information and instructions you present
> for the particular audience.
>
> For instance, someone viewing the repository can be expected to know where to download
> the source code from, whereas someone viewing the documentation website might not.
{:.callout}

## Add Code Reference

We'll add a new page to the documentation with the docstrings from the package.

- Add the `mkdocstrings` plugin to `mkdocs.yml`:

  ```yaml
  # mkdocs.yml
  plugins:
  - mkdocstrings
  ```

- Include the `mkdocstrings[python]` package in the `docs` dependencies of the pyprojects.toml:

  ```toml
  # pyproject.toml
  [project.optional-dependencies]
  docs = [
    "mkdocs-material",
    "mkdocstrings[python]"
  ]
  ```

- Add a new page `docs/ref.md` with the content:

  ```md
  # Code Reference

  ::: example_package_YOUR_USERNAME_HERE.rescale
  ```

- Stop the preview server using <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>C</kbd>
- Reinstall using `pip install --editable ".[docs]"`  since we added a new dependency
- Reload the documentation preview using `mkdocs serve`

MkDocs automatically adds the additional page to your documentation.

## Read The Docs

If you want to use https://readthedocs.org to build your docs, you'll need to add a `.readthedocs.yml` file. Find details at [https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file).

## Challenges

> ## Adding a page
>
> Try adding another page.
{: .challenge}


> ## Further reading
>
> - [https://diataxis.fr/](https://diataxis.fr/) outlines an excellent framework
>   for planning documentation.
> - [https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/)
>   outlines all the options and many of the plugins available with Material for MkDocs,
>   including syntax highlighting, and making comprehensive code listings for projects with many files.
>
{:.callout}

{% include links.md %}

Commit message:

add homepage in metadata after documentation is created.

_episodes/07.2-documentation-mkdocs-material.md, after:

---
title: "Documentation with MkDocs Material"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
questions:
- "How do I document my project?"
objectives:
- "Learn how to set up documentation using Material for MkDocs"
keypoints:
- "MkDocs is great for documentation"
---

In this lesson, we'll outline creating a documentation webpage
using the [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) framework
with the [Material](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/) theme.

You will:
- add the necessary dependencies to your `pyproject.toml` file,
- set up a basic documentation directory,
- create a configuration which comes with a table of contents by default,
- start a preview server,
- add a page which includes a code listing for your `rescale` function.


## Dependencies

Start by installing the `material-mkdocs` package into you virtual environment.

Add this to `pyproject.toml`:

```toml
[project.optional-dependencies]
...
docs = [
  "mkdocs-material"
]
```

... then reinstall using `pip install --editable ".[docs]"`.

> ## `doc` or `docs`
>
> The [python packaging standard](https://packaging.python.org/en/latest/specifications/core-metadata/#provides-extra-multiple-use)
> for the name of this extra is `doc`, whereas `docs` is ~3x more popular.
{:.callout}

## Template

Create an empty site using:
```bash
mkdocs new .
```

This will create files and directories as follows:
```
.
├─ docs/
│  └─ index.md
└─ mkdocs.yml
```

- The `index.md` file will contain the content on the front page of your documentation website.
- The `mkdocs.yml` file is the configuration file for the documentation.

## Configuration

In the `mkdocs.yml` file, set the site name and add some additional lines to enable the theme:

```yaml
site_name: Example Package YOUR USERNAME HERE
site_url: https://<your github username>.github.io/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE
theme:
  name: material
```

> ## `site_url` is important
> It is important to set the `site_url` because it's assumed to be set by a number of plugins.
>
> It's set here to a [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) address –
> you can set it to `https://<your github username>.github.io/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE`
> or any other domain where you want to publish.
{:.callout}

## Preview

You can preview the site as you change it by running the "preview server":

```bash
mkdocs serve
```

## Update `index.md`

And add (a correct) `docs/index.md` yourself:

````md
<!--- docs/index.md -->
# Example Package YOUR USERNAME HERE

`example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE` is a simple Python library that contains a single function for rescaling arrays.

## Installation

You can install the package by calling:
```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/<your github username>/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE
```

## Usage

```python
import numpy as np
from example_package_YOUR_USERNAME_HERE.rescale import rescale

# rescales over 0 to 1
rescale(np.linspace(0, 100, 5))
```

````

> ## `README.md` vs `index.md`
> Often, similar information will be contained in the repository README
> and the index page of the documentation – installation instructions,
> basic usage, licensing etc., and so it's common to want to include
> (parts of) the README in the index page.
>
> Sphinx has built-in tools to allow you to include parts of another markdown file
> directly, but MkDocs doesn't.
>
> We'd recommend writing the `index.md` and `README.md` files separately,
> so that you can vary the information and instructions you present
> for the particular audience.
>
> For instance, someone viewing the repository can be expected to know where to download
> the source code from, whereas someone viewing the documentation website might not.
{:.callout}

## Add Code Reference

We'll add a new page to the documentation with the docstrings from the package.

- Add the `mkdocstrings` plugin to `mkdocs.yml`:

  ```yaml
  # mkdocs.yml
  plugins:
  - mkdocstrings
  ```

- Include the `mkdocstrings[python]` package in the `docs` dependencies of the pyprojects.toml:

  ```toml
  # pyproject.toml
  [project.optional-dependencies]
  docs = [
    "mkdocs-material",
    "mkdocstrings[python]"
  ]
  ```

- Add a new page `docs/ref.md` with the content:

  ```md
  # Code Reference

  ::: example_package_YOUR_USERNAME_HERE.rescale
  ```

- Stop the preview server using <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>C</kbd>
- Reinstall using `pip install --editable ".[docs]"`  since we added a new dependency
- Reload the documentation preview using `mkdocs serve`

MkDocs automatically adds the additional page to your documentation.

## Publish to GitHub Pages

To publish the documentation to GitHub pages, run:
```bash
mkdocs gh-deploy
```

The documentation will be made available at the URL
`https://<your github username>.github.io/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE`

Once this is deployed, you can add an additional URL to the `pyproject.toml` file,
which will be included in the package metadata and linked to on PyPI.

```toml
# pyproject.toml

[project.urls]
Homepage = "https://<your github username>.github.io/example-package-YOUR-USERNAME-HERE"
```

## Read The Docs

If you want to use https://readthedocs.org to build your docs, you'll need to add a `.readthedocs.yml` file. Find details at [https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/config-file).

## Challenges

> ## Adding a page
>
> Try adding another page.
{: .challenge}


> ## Further reading
>
> - [https://diataxis.fr/](https://diataxis.fr/) outlines an excellent framework
>   for planning documentation.
> - [https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/)
>   outlines all the options and many of the plugins available with Material for MkDocs,
>   including syntax highlighting, and making comprehensive code listings for projects with many files.
>
{:.callout}

{% include links.md %}
