episodes/environment.md, before:

---
title: "Environments and task runners"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

- How do you install and manage packages?
- How can you ensure others run the same code you do?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Learn about virtual environments
- Use a task runner to manage environments and run code

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

One of Python's biggest strengths is its ecosystem of packages which build upon and extend
the capabilities offered by the standard library.

We'll look at how:

- You should use virtual environments to manage the dependencies of different projects,
- You can install packages you want to build on using `pip`, and
- You can install Python applications you just want to use using `pipx`.

## Creating and Activating/Deactivating a Virtual Environment

Whenever we're developing or working in Python, the best practice is to use a
"virtual environment" which isolates the packages used for a particular project.

Python 3 comes with the `venv` module built-in, which supports making virtual environments.
To make one, you call the module with:

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
```

This creates a new directory `.venv` containing:

- `.venv/bin`
  - A link to the Python version,
  - A link to the Python package installer `pip`, and
  - activation scripts.
- `.venv/lib/site-packages` where packages will be installed.

To activate the environment, source the activation script:

```bash
. .venv/bin/activate
```

Now `.venv/bin` has been added to your PATH, and usually your shell's prompt
will be modified to indicate you are "in" a virtual environment:

```
% . .venv/bin/activate
(.venv) %
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Upgrade `pip`

Check the version of pip installed!
If it's old, you might want to run `pip install --upgrade pip` or,
for Python 3.9 or later, you can add `--upgrade-deps` to the venv creation line.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

To "leave" the virtual environment, you
undo those changes by running the deactivate function the activation added to
your shell:

```bash
deactivate
```

The prompt will revert:

```
(.venv) % deactivate
%
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

## Alternatives

There are several alternatives that provide the same experience, but offer some
speed or update benefits. The installable `virtualenv` package provides the
same interface as the built-in `venv`, but is faster, has more options, and
has up-to-date embedded pip.

Another alternative is `uv`, which is written in Rust, and `uv venv` is
actually faster than Python can even start up, though it doesn't install pip
by default (since you are supposed to use `uv pip`).

Use the tool you prefer; the resulting venv works identically.
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

## What about conda?

The same concerns apply to Conda. You should always make separate environments and
use those. Quick tips:

```bash
conda config --set auto_activate_base false  # turn off the default environment
conda env create -n some_name  # or use paths with `-p`
conda activate some_name
conda deactivate
```

Alternative implementations of `conda` are available and may be faster, like:

- [Micromamba](https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/micromamba.html)
  a single binary, also written in C++,
- [Pixi](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi) written in Rust.

[Mamba](https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba), written in C++,
became very popular as its package resolver was much faster than the default in `conda`.
In 2023, `conda` incorporated the `libmamba` package resolver as its default,
largely eliminating the speed difference between `conda` and `mamba`.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Installing Packages

To install a package,
first make sure the environment is activated using `. .venv/bin/activate` first,
then call:

```bash
pip install <package>
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Install `numpy`

- Install the numpy package into your virtual environment.
- Test it by opening a Python session and running `import numpy as np` then `np.arange(15).reshape(3, 5)`.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::: solution

## Solution

```
% . .venv/bin/activate
(.venv) % pip install numpy
(.venv) % python
Python 3.12.3 (main, Apr  9 2024, 08:09:14) [Clang 15.0.0 (clang-1500.3.9.4)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import numpy as np
>>> np.arange(15).reshape(3, 5)
array([[ 0,  1,  2,  3,  4],
       [ 5,  6,  7,  8,  9],
       [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]])
>>> exit()
(.venv) %
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: caution

## Installing Packages in the "base" and "user" environment

Be careful installing packages without an activated virtual environment.

You will see two _very_ common recommendations when installing a package, neither of
which you should use unless you know what you're doing:

```bash
pip install <package>         # Use only in virtual environment!
```

Unless you've activated a virtual environment,
this will try to install globally, and if you don't have permission, will install to your
user site packages. In global site packages, you can get conflicting versions
of libraries, you can't tell what you've installed for what, packages can
update and break your system; it's a mess. This is the _"update problem"_.

```bash
pip install --user <package>  # Almost never use
```

This will install in your user directory. This is even worse worse,
because all installs of Python on your computer share it, so you might override
and break things you didn't intend to. And with pip's new smart solver,
updating packages inside a global environment can take many minutes and produce
unexpectedly solves that are technically "correct" but don't work because it
backsolved conflicts to before issues were discovered.

There is a solution: virtual environments (libraries) or pipx (applications).

There are likely a _few_ libraries (ideally just `pipx`) that you just have to
install globally. Go ahead, but be careful, and always use your system package
manager instead if you can, like

- [`brew` on macOS](https://brew.sh),
- [`winget`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/) or [`scoop`](https://scoop.sh/) on Windows,
- `apt-get` on Ubuntu.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Installing Applications

There are many Python packages that provide a command line interface and are
not really intended to be imported (`pip`, for example, should not be
imported). It is really inconvenient to have to set up venvs for every command
line tool you want to install, however. [`pipx`](https://pipx.pypa.io/),
from the makers of `pip`, solves this problem for you.

If you `pipx install` a package, it will be
created inside a new virtual environment, and
just the executable scripts will be exposed in your regular shell.

Pipx also has a `pipx run <package>` command, which will download a package and
run a script of the same name, and will cache the temporary environment for a
week. This means you have all of PyPI at your fingertips in one line on any
computer that has pipx installed!

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Install `pipx` and `cowsay`

- Install `pipx` by following the [installation instructions](https://pipx.pypa.io/).
- Test it by running `pipx run cowsay -t "venvs are the foo\!"`

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::: solution

## Solution

Ubuntu Linux:

```command
sudo apt update
sudo apt install pipx
pipx ensurepath
```

macOS:

```command
brew install pipx
pipx ensurepath
```

Then:

```command
% pipx run cowsay -t "venvs are the foo\!"
  __________________
| venvs are the foo! |
  ==================
                  \
                   \
                     ^__^
                     (oo)\_______
                     (__)\       )\/\
                         ||----w |
                         ||     ||
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

- Virtual environments isolate software
- Virtual environments solve the update problem
- A task runner makes it easier to contribute to software

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

Commit message:

docs: update environment section for clarity and focus on virtual environments

episodes/environment.md, after:

---
title: "Environments"
teaching: 10
exercises: 10
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions

- How do you install and manage packages?
- How can you ensure others run the same code you do?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Learn about and create virtual environments
- Adding packages to a virtual environment
- Installing python applications outside of the virtual environment

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

One of Python's biggest strengths is its ecosystem of packages which build upon and extend
the capabilities offered by the standard library.

We'll look at how:

- You should use virtual environments to manage the dependencies of different projects,
- You can install packages you want to build on using `pip`, and
- You can install Python applications you just want to use using `pipx`.

## Creating and Activating/Deactivating a Virtual Environment

Whenever we're developing or working in Python, the best practice is to use a
"virtual environment" which isolates the packages used for a particular project.

Python 3 comes with the `venv` module built-in, which supports making virtual environments.
To make one, you call the module with:

```bash
python3 -m venv .venv
```

This creates a new directory `.venv` containing:

- `.venv/bin`
  - A link to the Python version,
  - A link to the Python package installer `pip`, and
  - activation scripts.
- `.venv/lib/site-packages` where packages will be installed.

To activate the environment, source the activation script:

```bash
. .venv/bin/activate
```

Now `.venv/bin` has been added to your PATH, and usually your shell's prompt
will be modified to indicate you are "in" a virtual environment:

```
% . .venv/bin/activate
(.venv) %
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Upgrade `pip`

Check the version of pip installed!
If it's old, you might want to run `pip install --upgrade pip` or,
for Python 3.9 or later, you can add `--upgrade-deps` to the venv creation line.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

To "leave" the virtual environment, you
undo those changes by running the deactivate function the activation added to
your shell:

```bash
deactivate
```

The prompt will revert:

```
(.venv) % deactivate
%
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

## Alternatives

There are several alternatives that provide the same experience, but offer some
speed or update benefits. The installable `virtualenv` package provides the
same interface as the built-in `venv`, but is faster, has more options, and
has up-to-date embedded pip.

Another alternative is `uv`, which is written in Rust, and `uv venv` is
actually faster than Python can even start up, though it doesn't install pip
by default (since you are supposed to use `uv pip`).

Use the tool you prefer; the resulting venv works identically.
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: callout

## What about conda?

The same concerns apply to Conda. You should always make separate environments and
use those. Quick tips:

```bash
conda config --set auto_activate_base false  # turn off the default environment
conda env create -n some_name  # or use paths with `-p`
conda activate some_name
conda deactivate
```

Alternative implementations of `conda` are available and may be faster, like:

- [Micromamba](https://mamba.readthedocs.io/en/latest/user_guide/micromamba.html)
  a single binary, also written in C++,
- [Pixi](https://github.com/prefix-dev/pixi) written in Rust.

[Mamba](https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba), written in C++,
became very popular as its package resolver was much faster than the default in `conda`.
In 2023, `conda` incorporated the `libmamba` package resolver as its default,
largely eliminating the speed difference between `conda` and `mamba`.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Installing Packages

To install a package,
first make sure the environment is activated using `. .venv/bin/activate` first,
then call:

```bash
pip install <package>
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Install `numpy`

- Install the numpy package into your virtual environment.
- Test it by opening a Python session and running `import numpy as np` then `np.arange(15).reshape(3, 5)`.

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::: solution

## Solution

```
% . .venv/bin/activate
(.venv) % pip install numpy
(.venv) % python
Python 3.12.3 (main, Apr  9 2024, 08:09:14) [Clang 15.0.0 (clang-1500.3.9.4)] on darwin
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import numpy as np
>>> np.arange(15).reshape(3, 5)
array([[ 0,  1,  2,  3,  4],
       [ 5,  6,  7,  8,  9],
       [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]])
>>> exit()
(.venv) %
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: caution

## Installing Packages in the "base" and "user" environment

Be careful installing packages without an activated virtual environment.

You will see two _very_ common recommendations when installing a package, neither of
which you should use unless you know what you're doing:

```bash
pip install <package>         # Use only in virtual environment!
```

Unless you've activated a virtual environment,
this will try to install globally, and if you don't have permission, will install to your
user site packages. In global site packages, you can get conflicting versions
of libraries--you can't tell what you've installed for what, packages can
update and break your system; it's a mess. This is the _"update problem"_.

```bash
pip install --user <package>  # Almost never use
```

This will install in your user directory. This is even worse worse,
because all installs of Python on your computer share it, so you might override
and break things you didn't intend to. And with pip's new smart solver,
updating packages inside a global environment can take many minutes and produce
unexpectedly solves that are technically "correct" but don't work because it
backsolved conflicts to before issues were discovered.

There is a solution: virtual environments (libraries) or pipx (applications).

There are likely a _few_ libraries (ideally just `pipx`) that you just have to
install globally. Go ahead, but be careful, and always use your system package
manager instead if you can, like

- [`brew` on macOS](https://brew.sh),
- [`winget`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/package-manager/winget/) or [`scoop`](https://scoop.sh/) on Windows,
- `apt-get` on Ubuntu.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Installing Applications

There are many Python packages that provide a command line interface and are
not really intended to be imported (`pip`, for example, should not be
imported). It is really inconvenient to have to set up venvs for every command
line tool you want to install, however. [`pipx`](https://pipx.pypa.io/),
from the makers of `pip`, solves this problem for you. It is useful for utility
applications you want to use across projects.

If you `pipx install` a package, it will be
created inside a new virtual environment, and
just the executable scripts will be exposed in your regular shell.

Pipx also has a `pipx run <package>` command, which will download a package and
run a script of the same name, and will cache the temporary environment for a
week. This means you have all of PyPI at your fingertips in one line on any
computer that has pipx installed!

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge

## Install `pipx` and `cowsay`

- Install `pipx` by following the [installation instructions](https://pipx.pypa.io/).
- Test it by running `pipx run cowsay -t "venvs are the foo\!"`

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::: solution

## Solution

Ubuntu Linux:

```command
sudo apt update
sudo apt install pipx
pipx ensurepath
```

macOS:

```command
brew install pipx
pipx ensurepath
```

Then:

```command
% pipx run cowsay -t "venvs are the foo\!"
  __________________
| venvs are the foo! |
  ==================
                  \
                   \
                     ^__^
                     (oo)\_______
                     (__)\       )\/\
                         ||----w |
                         ||     ||
```

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: keypoints

- Virtual environments isolate software
- Virtual environments prevent breaking your global python environment when 
installing or updating conflicting packages

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::
